# doesdiversitymakeussmarerinls641project
Displaying racial disparities in North Carolina counties public high school expenditure and diversity 
Academic Achievement, Funding, and Diversity in North Carolina Public Schools
Ian Elliott, Neha Patel, Hanan Ali, Jay Saini


Introduction:

In the past many court cases have challenged the use of race during the zoning of public schools and during admissions into higher educational institutions. The Supreme Court, once a strong supporter of school desegregation, grew increasingly skeptical of government programs that use race in decision-making. Much of modern day research supports the notion that racial integration within schools is a good thing and helps students achieve more. Factors such as school expenditure also undoubtedly plays a role in student achievement and by compiling already collected research into an interactive data visualization we can help communicate the relationship between racial diversity, school expenditure, and academic achievement and help educate and advise users during their pursuit of diverse, equitable, and inclusive initiatives.

Motivation:

In terms of relevant domains, our project is concerned broadly with education and diversity, equity, and inclusion (DEI), and we’re restricting that scope to the state of NC and its 100 counties. A target user is someone interested in these domains, but perhaps a more specific user persona is a parent moving to/within NC who is interested in public school zoning/districting for their child(ren). We have identified what we consider the three most important variables for this sort of decision—diversity, academic achievement, and funding—and we want users to be able to explore the state and investigate how counties within it compare and stack up in these three areas. However, we do not want this visualization to simply be a dictionary or encyclopedia wherein the user finds some metric or desired value and is finished—we also want to invite the user to compare and extrapolate. One way we can do that is by allowing the user to compare counties, but another is by allowing the user to compare between these three variables we have identified and how they correlate with each other. That is, not only how do different counties compare to one another with regard to funding, diversity, and academic achievement, but also how do those three variables compare to each other within individual counties?

We began our project interested more particularly in just diversity and education and their correlation, but we have since decided to add funding into the fold as a sort of third prong. The visual of the correlation between academic achievement, diversity, and funding could also serve as a great resource to policymakers and advocates to build support for the consideration of diversity in addition to academic achievement and funding within educational institutions (and to try to understand the interconnected and nuanced relationship between these three, why each is important for the other two). Oftentimes when we think of diversity initiatives in education we jump to those within higher educational institutions like colleges and universities. We think it would be interesting to create a visualization that highlights the correlation both between counties and within variables within those counties because we think this would be a more nuanced way to look at the conventional metrics for choosing a K-12 public school. 

Data:

Ideally we want the project to convey these main things: the regions/counties of NC we are looking at, the education of that region (i.e. SAT scores, dropout rates, percentage of college enrollment, median years of school completed, etc.), and the demographics of the region (i.e. race, ethnicity, median income, etc.). When searching for data that fits this criteria we found 2 great options. MyFutureNC has in-depth county attainment research with data on the overview of each county's demographics and in depth data on the academic attainments and success of their public schools. We’ve prioritized using public school data for this project as their means of funding is more straightforward compared to private schools and home schooled students. Additionally, while diversity is a complex and vast measurement that incorporates many different variables, the most consistent variable within this dataset is racial distribution. We hope to utilize the Shannon-Wiener Index to transform the racial demographics into a quantifiable metric. Due to this constraint we will narrow our scope of diversity to include just racial distributions. The North Carolina Office of State Budget and Management has information on county public school expenditure throughout the years that we can join with our other data variables and use to draw conclusions. 


Task:

With that said, there are many potential tasks and outcomes for the scenarios we’ve presented—perhaps the user will decide that they value one variable more than the other two, or perhaps the comparisons/correlations we provide may only obfuscate things for the user, but that is potentially also a valuable outcome because it may encourage the user to do further research (and to understand how interconnected the three variables are). The goal for our visualization is less so to allow the users to come up with a neat solution for where they want to send their kid to school and more so to present compelling data for why all three variables are important, complex, and interrelated.

So, with the dashboard we create, a user may decide that they want to start by scrolling over counties (hovering will display a tooltip with the county name and very basic information about that county like population and median income). They likely already have some areas in mind, in which case they may begin clicking on specific counties (e.g., Carteret). The 4 non-GIS visualizations will then be affected: the bar graph will show a race breakdown for public schools in that specific county only, and the three scatterplots will highlight a specific point (that point being Carteret County). The expectation is that the user will continue to hover and click and observe the alterations to the non-GIS visualizations, and in this way they can compare metrics between counties and observe how metrics are correlated to one another within counties.




